---
layout: post
title: "Git and GitHub tutorial"
date: 2023-03-31
---

The following excerpt is from Bard.

## Prompt

Explain the relationship between Git and GitHub and provide a tutorial on using Git and GitHub for a technical writer intern who has no experience in version control software.

## Bard Answer

Git and GitHub are two different things, but they are often used together. Git is a version control system, which means it tracks changes to files over time. GitHub is a website that hosts Git repositories.

A Git repository is a collection of files that are tracked by Git. When you make changes to a file in a Git repository, Git keeps track of the changes. You can then revert to previous versions of the file if you need to. You can also share your Git repository with others, so they can see your changes and make their own changes.

GitHub is a website that hosts Git repositories. You can use GitHub to create a new Git repository, upload your files to the repository, and share the repository with others. You can also use GitHub to collaborate on projects with others.

Here is a tutorial on using Git and GitHub for a technical writer intern who has no experience in version control software:

* Install Git on your computer. You can download Git from the Git website.

* Create a new Git repository. You can do this by running the following command:

`git init`

This will create a new Git repository in the current directory.

* Add your files to the repository. You can do this by running the following command:

`git add .`

This will add all of the files in the current directory to the repository.

* Commit your changes. You can do this by running the following command:

`git commit -m "My first commit"`

This will create a new commit in the repository, and the message "My first commit" will be associated with the commit.

* Push your changes to GitHub. You can do this by running the following command:

git push origin master

This will push your changes to the "master" branch of the repository on GitHub.

* Create a branch. You can do this by running the following command:

`git checkout -b new-branch`

This will create a new branch called "new-branch".

* Make changes to a file in the new branch.

* Commit your changes in the new branch.

* Push your changes to GitHub.

* Merge your changes into the "master" branch. You can do this by running the following command:

`git merge new-branch`

This will merge the changes from the "new-branch" branch into the "master" branch.

This is just a basic tutorial on using Git and GitHub. There are many other things you can do with Git and GitHub, but this should get you started.
