---
layout: post
title:  "REST APIs (part 2)"
date:   2018-05-15 
categories:  API, REST

---

In today's post, I will discuss REST API syntax and introduce Chrome Postman for API testing. 

## REST API syntax

REST APIs use the HTTP protocol, which is the protocol for web browsing. This makes things very convenient because you can just use a web browser to try API calls. A REST API mainly contains three parts: 

* Resource (noun)
* Method (verb)
* Parameters

**Resources** as nouns. They are the things you want to work with, such as a book, a post, a user, or an account. 

**Methods** are verbs/actions you want to perform on your resources (i.e. nouns). 
The most common HTTP methods/verbs include:

* GET: retrieve a resource
* POST: create a new resource
* PUT: update or replace an existing resource
* DELETE: delete a resource 

**Parameters** specify the conditions you need to complete the action/method. For example, when you use Google to search for a keyword, you are providing the keyword as the parameter and using the GET method to retrieve the relevant resources from the web. GET is the most frequently used method. This is because the majority of web users only retrieve information from the web rather than updating or deleting anything. Some parameters are mandatory, which means if you don't specify them, the API will NOT work.  Some are optional, which means these parameters can be omitted. Different APIs have different rules. Refer to the each vendor's API documentation for details. 

Another important factor to keep in mind is, to perform actions such as POST, PUT and DELETE, most likely you will need permission/authorization. This means you need an API key to do those actions. Even the GET method is not always publicly available in many REST APIs. You need to register with them to get the API key. An API key can be submitted as part of the parameters. 


The basic REST API syntax is as follows. 

```
{Method}http(s)://{domain/resources}?{param1=value1&param2=value2&...&api_key=your_api_key}
```

in which

* Methods are typically one of the following: GET, POST, PUT, DELETE.
* `domain/resources` is the resource you are trying to retrieve, create, update, or delete.  
* `?` is a symbol to indicate the end of the resource specification and the beginning of the parameters. 
* `&` specify the "and" condition in the parameters.
* param-value pairs and API_key and value pair specify the actual parameters used for this API call.  

For example, in the previous post, I mentioned a Google API for retrieving book info based on ISBN number. It contains the following three parts: 

* method: `GET`
* resource: `wwww.googleapis.com/books/v1/volumes`
* parameters: `q=isbn:0747532699`, which indicates I am querying for info on a book with the isbn number 0747532699
   
```
GET https://www.googleapis.com/books/v1/volumes?q=isbn:0747532699
```

Note: In a web browser, the GET method is the default method, which means you do not need to include the Get method in a web browser.


## Chrome Postman

To try out how API works, a handy plugin you can install is Chrome's Postman. See [Postman](https://www.getpostman.com/) for details. 

Click this 
[link](https://github.com/taolicd/taolicd.github.io/tree/master/images/postmannew.jpeg) to view a screen shot of the Postman GUI. 

## Authorization protocol 

The majority of the REST APIs require you to register with them to get permission/authorization to their services. The most common authorization protocol uses the open standard called [OAuth](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OAuth). OAuth has version 1.0 and 2.0. Both versions are widely used. For example, when you register with vendors such as Yelp or Twitter for API keys, you will most likely get 4 sets of strings from them:

* Consumer key
* Consumer secret
* Token
* Token secret

**Consumer key** is the API key associated with the application (Yelp, Twitter, etc.). This key is what identifies the client with the application/server.  The client is a website/service that you are creating to try to access the application.

**Consumer secret** is the client password that is used to authenticate with the authentication server, which is a Twitter/Facebook/etc server that authenticates the client.

**Token** is issued to the client once the client successfully authenticates itself (using the consumer key & secret). This access token define what data the client can and cannot access. Every time the client wants to access the data, the **token secret** is sent with the access token as a password (similar to the consumer secret). 

The above terms are for OAuth 1.0. In Postman, you can enter your authentication info as shown in this [screen shot](https://github.com/taolicd/taolicd.github.io/tree/master/images/oauth1.JPG). 

## Using REST APIs to gather data for data analysis and data aggregation

So now you know that you can get raw data in JSON or XML from your favorite websites such as Yelp, Twitter, Facebook or New York Times. 

The Postman plugin is a tool for you to learn and test API calls. In real life  scenarios, you probably will write some sort of scripts to automate the web scraping activity. A good tool to start with is the [curl](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CURL). 

The next task is to try to make sense of the raw data and find patterns. This is out of the scope for today's discussion. Stay tuned and I may blog about data analysis using API query results in the future :-) 


## Where to find interesting web APIs?

A good place to explore the available web APIs is [programmableweb](http://www.programmableweb.com/apis/directory). The opportunities are endless. Have fun!






