---
layout: post
title:  "REST APIs (part 1)"
date:   2018-05-08
categories:  API, REST

---

Today I will try to demystify REST and API, the two terms you may frequently encounter separately or together while browsing websites. 

## What is an API?

API stands for Application Programming Interface. It defines a set of protocols and rules to allow different software applications to interact with each other. APIs have been in existence for as long as software has been around. With APIs, software developers can build applications by connecting to other applications and making use of data and services that are inside another application.

There are lots of types of APIs. See the [api-types](https://ffeathers.wordpress.com/2014/02/16/api-types/) for more info on API types.
 
 Traditionally only software developers cared about APIs. Software end users didn't usually know about APIs or interact with APIs. Recently more and more non developers start to pay attention to APIs, especially to a special type of web APIs called REST APIs. 

### Why are we talking a lot about APIs now? 

Since the advent of the Web in early 90s, the software landscape has shifted a lot toward a Web based ecosystem. When people use the term API, most likely they mean web APIs even though there are other types of APIs. Here are some reasons why web APIs are becoming attractive even to non software developers. 

* The wide spread web and browser economy greatly fuels the demands for web APIs so different web apps can interact with each other.  
* The open source/open platform movement makes more and more companies willingly want to share data and services with other users and developers. APIs are a great way to allow outsiders to gain access to previously segregated data or services guarded within a private company. 


### What is an API key and where to get it?

APIs can bring revenue because companies charge outside users for accessing their data/resources. Typically they set up an authentication mechanism and require users to have an API key to access their data or services. Think of this as you check in a hotel. If you  pay an agreed fee, you get the hotel room key, which allows you to authenticate yourself and have access to the room for a certain period based on agreed upon conditions. 

API keys allow you gain access to private data and services. To get an API key, you need to register with individual vendors. For example, Google's popular [geocode](https://developers.google.com/maps/documentation/geolocation/intro) API allows you to access Google's geolocation data. You need to register and get an API key from Google. For non frequent users, the service is free. If your app needs to call for services more than a certain times a day, you need to pay a fee. 



## What is a REST API

REST stands for Representational State Transfer. It is a software architecture concept coined by Roy Fielding in his doctoral [dissertation](https://www.ics.uci.edu/~fielding/pubs/dissertation/rest_arch_style.htm) at UC Irvine in 2000. Before the invention of REST, [SOAP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SOAP) is the standard protocol for exchanging information in web services. SOAP is much harder and stringent to implement than REST. REST services makes things simpler, although much less strict in its enforcement of schema and communication.

REST APIs are designed to take advantage of existing protocols. When used for the Web, REST APIs take advantage of HTTP. This means a developer or an end user does not need to install additional software or libraries when creating or using a REST API.

The most common data formats you get from REST APIs are [XML and JSON](http://taolicd.github.io/xml,/html,json,/markdown,/xhtml/XMLHTMLJSONetc/). 

### Free REST APIs that do not need authentication

There are public web APIs that do not need API keys. These APIs give you access to public data. 

For example, there is a public API called [numbersapi](http://numbersapi.com/)
on numbers. If you click [this link](http://numbersapi.com/1..100), you will get facts on numbers from 1 to 100. This is because in the URL above, I put 1..100 as the parameter for this API query. If you change the parameter, the return results will be different. I will explain REST API syntax  in the next post. 


Another example is Google's Book API, which allows you to get/search public data for books based on ISBN without authentication. Take a close look at the isbn in the URL below. You can change the ISBN number to get results from a different book. 
[Google free REST API for book search based on isbn](https://www.googleapis.com/books/v1/volumes?q=isbn:0747532699)



### What can I use REST APIs for?

Web developers and app developers are the obvious consumers and creators of REST APIs. Using REST APIs provided by other companies, web developers and app developers can gain access to data and resources previously not available to them. They can also open up their own data and resources by creating REST APIs for others to use. 


Another big user group of REST APIs are web scraping enthusiasts and data scientists. Web scraping is a technique for gathering information from websites. Data scientists are people who analyze data to gain underlying insights that are not obvious to ordinary people. By using REST APIs, web scrapers and data scientists can get large amount of interesting raw data from the web in batch mode. 


Next week I will discuss REST API syntax and how to use Postman to try out REST APIs. [Postman](https://www.getpostman.com/docs/) is a free Chrome plug-in for testing REST APIs. 




